## 1. Purpose

This recommendation and its companion documents, SP 800-63-3, SP 800-63A, and SP 800-63C, provide technical guidelines to agencies for the implementation of electronic authentication (e-authentication).

##2. Introduction

Electronic authentication (e-authentication) is the process of establishing confidence in user identities electronically presented to an information system. E-authentication presents a technical challenge when this process involves the remote authentication of individual people over a network. This recommendation provides technical guidelines for the first step of that process, the enrollment and credentialing of subscribers (users).

The ongoing authentication of subscribers is central to this process. Subscriber authentication is performed by verifying that a claimant controls one or more *authenticators* (called *tokens* in earlier editions of SP 800-63) associated with a given subscriber. A successful authentication results in the assertion of an identifier, and optionally other identity information, to the relying party.

This document provides guidance on types of authentication processes, including choices of authenticators, that may be used at various authenticator assurance levels. It also provides guidance on the lifecycle of authenticators, including revocation in the event of loss or theft, and renewal.

These technical guidelines apply to remote electronic authentication of human users to IT systems over a network. They do not primarily address the authentication of a person who is physically present, for example, for access to buildings, although some credentials that are used remotely may also be used in local authentication. These technical guidelines establish requirements that Federal IT systems and service providers participating in authentication protocols be authenticated to subscribers. However, these guidelines do not specifically address machine-to-machine (such as router-to-router) authentication, or establish specific requirements for issuing authentication credentials to machines and servers when they are used in e-authentication protocols with people.

The paradigm of this document is that individuals (referred to as *claimants* at this stage) are challenged by a verifier to prove their control of one or more authenticators. In some cases, the same authenticators may be used for all authentication processes; in others, different authenticators (or a subset of authenticators) may be used at lower levels of authenticator assurance.

The strength of an authentication transaction is characterized by a metric known as the *Authenticator Assurance Level* (AAL). A summary of the technical requirements for each of the authenticator assurance levels is provided below; see Section 4 of this document for specific normative requirements.

**Authenticator Assurance Level 1** - Authenticator Assurance Level (AAL) 1 provides single factor remote network authentication, giving some assurance that the same Claimant who participated in previous transactions is accessing the protected transaction or data. AAL 1 allows a wide range of available authentication technologies to be employed and requires only a single authentication factor to be used. It also permits the use of any of the authentication methods of higher authenticator assurance levels. Successful authentication requires that the Claimant prove through a secure authentication protocol that he or she possesses and controls the authenticator.
Plaintext passwords or secrets are never transmitted across a network at AAL 1. However, this level does not require cryptographic methods or secrets with sufficient entropy to fully block offline attacks. For example, simple password challenge-response protocols are allowed. In many cases an eavesdropper, having intercepted such a protocol exchange or stored credentials, will be able to find the password with a straightforward dictionary attack.
At AAL 1, long-term shared authentication secrets may be revealed to Verifiers. At Level 1, assertions and assertion references require protection from manufacture/modification and reuse attacks.

**Authenticator Assurance Level 2** – Authenticator Assurance Level (AAL) 2 provides higher assurance that the same Claimant who participated in previous transactions is accessing the protected transaction or data. At least two different authentication factors are required. Various types of authenticators, including multi-factor Software Cryptographic Authenticators, may be used as described in SP 800-63A. AAL 2 also permits any of the authentication methods of AAL 3. AAL 2 authentication requires cryptographic mechanisms that protect the primary authenticator against compromise by the protocol threats for all threats at AAL 1 as well as verifier impersonation attacks. Approved cryptographic techniques are required for all assertion protocols used at AAL 2 and above.

Authentication requires that the Claimant prove, through a secure authentication protocol, that he or she controls the authenticator. The Claimant unlocks the authenticator with a password or biometric, or uses a secure multi-authenticator authentication protocol to establish two-factor authentication (through proof of possession of a physical or software authenticator in combination with some memorized secret knowledge). Long-term shared authentication secrets, if used, are never revealed to any party except, at issuance, to the Claimant; however, session (temporary) shared secrets may be provided to independent Verifiers by the CSP.

**Authentication Assurance Level 3** – Authentication Assurance Level (AAL) 3 is intended to provide the highest practical remote network authentication assurance. Authentication at AAL 3 is based on proof of possession of a key through a cryptographic protocol. AAL 3 is similar to AAL 2 except that only “hard” cryptographic authenticators are allowed. The authenticator is required to be a hardware cryptographic module validated at Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) 140-2 Level 2 or higher overall with at least FIPS 140-2 Level 3 physical security. Level 4 authenticator requirements can be met by using the PIV authentication key of a FIPS 201 compliant Personal Identity Verification (PIV) Card.

AAL 3 requires strong cryptographic authentication of all communicating parties and all sensitive data transfers between the parties. Either public key or symmetric key technology may be used. Authentication requires that the Claimant prove through a secure authentication protocol that he or she controls the authenticator. All protocol threats at AAL 2 must be prevented at AAL 3. Protocols shall also be strongly resistant to man-in-the-middle attacks. Long-term shared authentication secrets, if used, are never revealed to any party except the Claimant and Verifiers operated directly by the CSP; however, session (temporary) shared secrets may be provided to independent Verifiers by the CSP. Approved cryptographic techniques are used for all operations. All sensitive data transfers are cryptographically authenticated using keys bound to the authentication process.

At AAL 3, “bearer” assertions (as defined in SP 800-63C) are not used to establish the identity of the Claimant to the Relying Party (RP) other than on a very short-term basis to maintain the continuity of a session. “Holder-of-key” assertions (as defined in SP 800-63C) may be used, provided that the assertion contains a reference to a key that is possessed by the Subscriber and is cryptographically linked to the AAL 3 authenticator used to authenticate to the Verifier. The RP should maintain records of the assertions it receives, to support detection of a compromised verifier impersonating the subscriber.

